So while the mic was off on a half-time teaching.
And on a half-time teaching appointment. Now
officially then you were to be half-time
research, half-time teaching. Right. For the
nine months? For the 12 months. For the 12 months. I
had a 12-month appointment. I did not teach during
the summer. And what research facilities were you
provided in those early years? We had a
laboratory, a small laboratory, one desk and
things of the sort. Provided some animal.
And your, was your funding for the research? My
funding for the research was, I had a good funding
because researchers in this project, what they
call S-10 Animal Breeding Project, It was a
regional breeding project and I
had most of my animals that I was dealing with were
either at McGregor or on the high plains of Texas.
I had some animals here and then I started going
into sheep. nutrition and because I could get a
grant in antibiotics, I was the first, I think, in
the country to feed oriomycin or
chlorotetracycline to sheep. That's an
interesting anecdote that I'd like to tell about
that first. Please, please do.
One of the disease problems of sheep is that you...
Well, at the time that I began most of my large
animal work, there was what is known as the eye of
the master fattens the animal. In other words, you
have to have a person that goes in and observes
animals, and particularly each animal, and then
pulls feed away from them and do this kind of thing.
And so we decided to self-feed. a fellow professor
in animal science, a young man by the name of Bill
Comlottie. He was the son of the famed Bill
Comlottie in Illinois. He knew more about sheep
than I ever knew in the rest of my life, but we got
together and he said, let's self-feed him. And I
said, okay. Now, nobody had ever self-fed a sheep
before. So we brought the sheep in and divided them
up and dumped the feed into some feeders. And sure
enough, what happened was they died. They died of
enterotoxemia, overeating disease.
Well, Dr. Miller, Jack Miller, was head of the
department at that particular point. And he
called me in because he was supporting my
research. He'd buy the animals and he'd hoped when
I got through with them I could get the money back by
selling them.
We didn't mind anything. We fed them whatever we
fed them and then took them to market. And we
weren't worried about that particular point of
things that might go and get into the food chain or
things of that sort. At any rate, the animals died,
and so he stood me up in the corner, and Bill
Comlottie was in there, and he said, Harry, you
don't know how to feed sheep. He says, I don't want
you to do anything about feeding sheep again. I
don't want you to ever feed sheep unless you go with
Bill Comlottie. Well, Bill Comlottie had been
absolutely quiet in the situation. So after Dr.
Miller got through, I said, well, Dr. Miller,
there's one thing you need to know. The only sheep
that died were in the controls.
we had now come up with a way which that went faster
than anything else and even today they still use
the same material. So a controlled self-feeding
is that what you're saying? It was a controlled
well the self-feeding everything was self-fed
but the only animals that died Oh, and from
anaerotoxemia were those that received no
antibiotic. Oh, okay. And the antibiotic
completely prevented disease. In those early
years, how did a faculty member get evaluated and
get any feedback from the department head or the
dean about his performance? How did you know
whether you were being viewed as mostly, I think,
because of salary and promotion? But nobody
called you in and as far as you knew, there was no
written report. As far as I know, there was no
written report as far as that's concerned. You
see, I thought it was a little slow. I was promoted
to assistant professor after four years here. You
were an instructor. I was an associate professor.
I mean, associate, okay. So you came as an
assistant. I came as an assistant. Then four
years. I was an associate after four years. And
then two years later, I was a full professor. Six
years out of, oh, that's fast. Yeah. And so I've
spent, since that time, 1958 on, I have spent my
life as a full professor. You may be the senior full
professor around here. in terms of number of years
as a full professor. As a full professor,
yeah.
During those years, was it like after I got here
that normally the salary increases that mattered
came the first year after the legislature met and
then the second year of the biennium there wasn't
much money for salary increases? That's about
right. And your research and teaching continued.
When did you begin to get in and headed toward the
administration? Well, it started with the
Century Study. Oh, okay. The Aspirations Report.
The Aspirations Report. Oh, that's great. How did
you get appointed? Do you have any idea? I have no
idea. I just woke up one day and they said you were
it. And I was chairman of the research committee.
And yours truly was the secretary of the other part
and he doesn't know how he got appointed either. It
just and so we wrote the report and apparently it
was strong enough that
in Well, there was one other thing that happened.
You see, up until 1960, I was single. Mm-hm. And I
married in 1960. Okay. And the summer of 1962, I was
invited to be a visiting professor at Cornell
University to teach a course in biochemistry.
Mm-hm. Well, I borrowed the notes from Mac
Prescott and went on up and had a good time during
the summer. Mm-hm. And they were looking at me
pretty heavily. And I
don't know, it wasn't anything formal or anything
of a sort. But the day before I left, the head of
department calls me up and says, we'd like to hire
you. So I came back with a job offer. Again, there
was no interview or anything in particular, any
review or anything of a sort. Well, at that point,
R.E. Patterson says, I want you to be, and Earl
Rudder says, I want you to be associate director of
the Experiment Station. This is 1962. And so by
December 1, it was... associate director of the
experiment station and so hey I was teaching you
see at that particular point so Bill Ellis came
down and taught my 303 of course and I was teaching
the biochemical genetics course and I kept on with
that until I finished but there was no one that
could pick that one up until you know the semesters
went on into January at that particular point in
time. All right, now let's back up on the campus
administration. When you came, who was the Dean of
Agriculture? Charles Shepardson. Shepardson?
Shepardson. Spell, I don't know that name.
S-H-E-P... H-S-H-E-P-A-R-D-S-O-N, I think it
is, Shepardson. And then when, who follows him?
Jack Miller.
And then Patterson? No. Gus Watkins as dean. Oh,
okay. And Gus Watkins was demoted to, well, his
title was demoted to director of agricultural
instruction, and Patterson assumed the title of
dean.
And then when Artie Lewis, Don Lewis retired, he
assumed the title of Director of the Experiment
Station and I went in as Associate Dean, Associate
Director. Alright, when in those, in the early
50s,
the administrative structure at that point The
dean of agriculture, did the Experiment Station
and Extension Service report to the dean in the
early 50s? No. They were separate. They were
separate. And for you and your colleagues in the
50s, did you all have a perception of the president
and how he was getting along? Who was president
when you got here
in the 50s? I don't recall. Gilchrist or Bolton?
No, I think Gilchrist was chancellor at that
particular point. Bolton probably. Mary Trax,
Bolton. Yeah. Did you all see much of the entire
administration? I saw. I paid little or no
attention to the presidency. And did you see much
of the board of directors it was then called? I saw
absolutely nothing of it. And then Morgan, was
here in the... David Morgan, yes. And he had some
plans for changing A&M, but he didn't survive. Was
there much sentiment among the faculty at that
point? I didn't sense anything. Because you see,
generally, I was doing my duty and I was trying to do
this. And then when we had the opportunity for the
central study, the centennial study, that was a
point in which we could get our ideas put together.
And of course, at that point, Earl Rudder was
president. Do you remember any reaction when he
was appointed president among faculty types?
Well, I wondered what a guy who didn't have a PhD was
going to do. You weren't acquainted with him at
that time, were you? No, I was acquainted with him.
How? I was
in the Army Reserves. Oh, sure, sure. And I was in
his division. Describe him as a reserve general.
He was a magnificent reserve general, and so I
began to know him, and we became acquainted there.
And in a sense, I was one of the cronies that he
appointed. And let's see, did you all go to Austin
for meetings? No, we had our local meetings here,
but for summer camp, we'd go to Fort Hood, North
Fort Hood. And now your your appointment by him in
the reserve was after he got here or did you know
him? No no I knew him before he got here so I was well
acquainted with him before he arrived and as a
matter of fact they people would call me up and said
what do you know about this guy Earl Rudder? And
what would you have told them? I told them he's all
right he'll work out describe him in personality
and style and manner before he became president? I
don't think it was much different from what that
was because he was a politician then. And
his remarkable situation was that he was doing
things that he thought he could sell as a political
man. Now, he didn't have to do that because he was a
military man. And in the military, he was the boss.
He was a commanding officer. He was a colonel when I
first knew him and he got a star soon thereafter and
I'm not sure when he got the second star but in the
process it would but we'd run into him and he was
then he was running for land commissioner I have a
chance to run into him up there and we'd chat. I
learned to know Margaret, and so I knew him before
he came. All right, and when he came here, do you
remember any early speeches or anything public
that he did as the new president? Not really, no.
No, I don't remember. Because I got here in the fall
of 59 and I don't remember seeing much of him. No.
And I remember him some, am I correct in
remembering that he sometimes would mention that
he didn't, wasn't very good at making speeches and
he knew it? I suspect I've heard him say that, but I
never paid much attention. That didn't bother me.
Did he, did you all see him ever come around in the
animal sciences building? No. Or should I say
Animal Industries Building? Animal Industries.
No, as a matter of fact, I didn't. But of course,
O.D. Butler was a colonel, you know, a lieutenant
colonel at that particular point. He was
commanding officer and I was in O.D.' 's
battalion. Was O.D. the department head of animal
science by then? He became department head, I
think, in 1956. Oh, okay. So he's department head.
Yeah, that's when Jack Miller went over to be dean.
All right, this committee, this century study and
the aspirations report and so forth, describe as
much as you can remember about that. Who, how,
what, where, and so forth. Well,
I remember meeting, and several times, Bill
Barzac, the late Bill Barzac, was appointed, I
called the Dean of Liberal Arts and asked for a
person to work with me. And he appointed Bill
Bartak, so Bill Bartak was the secretary and the
guy who put it all together. And the person that
seemed to stand out more than anybody else or two
was Bruno Swalinski.
Mm-hm. And The general consensus of that
situation was that what we had to do was to move
basically into science. And then at that point in
time, I wrote a section on that on the research and
extension centers that I call them research
stations now or substations. That they needed to
have extension people with them as well as they
need to be education units as well as anything
else. And that report
was accepted, and I think pretty well accepted in
total. It didn't have the conflicts that the
teaching did.
Because I was the secretary of that other half, I
remember that. And your committee met about how
often? Once a week? Once every week or once every
couple of weeks or something of that sort. Eight,
fifteen, eighteen members? About that. Was there
any dissension that you remember at all in the...
No, but there was some vigorous discussion. With
Bruno there, obviously. And one of them said,
we've got to do this kind of a thing. And I would sort
of look up and wonder about it. Was there ever any
attempt by any outside administrator, board
member, a former student, or anybody else to
interject something into the committee's
actions? Not that I know of. I never heard of it
either. Not that I know of. And no reporters? No
reporters. And the report was given, summarized,
and...
And how did you all feel when officially, finally,
all of this was, of the report was accepted? I
thought we felt, we were, we expected it to be. What
did you and your colleagues, what was the reaction
when you heard about the recommendations of
co-education, non-compulsory core, racial
integration, broadened curriculum? I think
fundamentally we were all in agreement with it. At
least I was. I don't remember any campus. About
that time the A&M Mothers Club had named me
professor of at the time, and they had a luncheon
for me here. And after the luncheon, Beverly made a
few of them very angry because she was definitely
for co-education. And of course, these mothers
said, no, they wouldn't do that. So finally,
Beverly said to these ladies, she said, suppose
your daughter married one of these people. Would
you deny her an education? The conversation
stopped. I reported it to Errol Rudder and he says,
good. But I think there were some other problems or
some other situations that you know more about
than I do. Did anyone ever in any manner contact you
about the outside opposition to some of these
changes? Never.
No. How did you and your colleagues feel when the
board officially adopted those changes? I think
we were happy with it. Now the official
recommendation was to change the name, as it had
been in many other states, to Texas State
University. I know. What did you all think about
that? I think Texas A&M, good, why don't they get
rid of that name? Come on, come on, let's go with it,
what everybody else does. That was my, I think, the
reaction generally. Do you know who made the
actual recommendation of what we now have as the
name? I think it was Earl Rutter, wasn't it? Wayne
Hall. Wayne Hall. Mr. Rutter was very, very
opposed to dropping the A&M. Hall's the one that
came up with the variety that we now, that the A&M is
not an abbreviation, but in effect a logo with an
ampersand, not the A&D. And that the A and M are not
abbreviations for agriculture and mechanical.
Well, in the year 2001, I'm damn glad it happened.
Yes. It is a unique situation. Well, after that, I
said, well, you know, Texas A&M, Cornell,
They were the two I could think of as far as names are
concerned, a straight university. All right,
now, and you were, began your administrative
career now in 58? No, I began it at 62. 62, 62, okay.
And what were your duties when you first? I was
associate director of the agricultural
experiments. And what did the associate director
really do? Well, you began to approve projects,
and you began to line up, and you suddenly realized
that they were in charge of the budget. And one of
the biggest things you did was prepare the budgets
and I ended up doing the budgets for both teaching
and research for the Experiment Station. I was
really an assistant dean, associate dean as well.
Although I didn't have the title. You reported to
whom? Patterson. To Patterson. And he was
director of the Experiment Station. He was
director of the Experiment Station. And your
offices were? In the Jack Williams Building. What
we used to call the System Building. The System
Building. And the Dean of Agriculture at that time
Was that Gus? That was Gus and he was maneuvered
into a position that took him to the Dominican
Republic.
And so Richard Potts, Dick Potts, came over as an
assistant dean at that point and handled the
students. So the dean's office actually moved
over And Patterson then became director and dean?
Director, dean and director. Dean and director.
Now Extension Service remained separate and they
were across the hall and they were in almost an
autonomous kind of a thing and Patterson had his
problems with that more than anything else
because he was trying to downgrade the power of the
county agent. And that didn't work, and the county
ignored the boom on him. And so I don't know. He and
Earl Rudder became cross with each other, and so he
resigned in 1967. As the associate director of the
Experiment Station, what were the problems that
you had to cope with? Well, my problem was, and I
guess I was a little nasty, because we took a trip by
airplane.
with the Board of Regents. And I was asked
essentially to make a description of where we were
going, and Patterson was sitting there doing it.
So here we was, you know, I was separating it out.
And Patterson, I guess he was, but he never, well,
he wanted me to, incorporate the extension
service under this and as you know that was never
accomplished until year before last or last year.
Now during those same years in the early 60s Mr.
Rutter in fact became the chief executive officer
of not only the campus but also the system. He was
president of both. Yes. When that occurred, did
that make the administrative task of you and your
colleagues easier or more difficult? It made it
different in the sense that the academic vice
president, I reported to the academic vice
president relative to the teaching end of things
and the budget situation there. and all other
matters I reported directly to Earl Rudder.
Right, and although you were associate director
at that time, were you in fact the chief academic
officer for the Experiment Station? I think so.
And you reported to Wayne Hall? For that
Experiment Station, the dean. Oh, you reported to
the dean. No, I did not become the chief executive
officer of the college then, until the School of
Agriculture, until September 1967, when I became
acting dean and acting director. All right, now
what led to that change? Well, Patterson's
resignation. Oh, okay, all right. And as far as you
know, what was the process that led to your being
selected at that point? It was an interesting
process because I was told by Earl Rudder I did not
have a chance to become dean. He said, we're not
going to make you dean. We're not going to make you
dean and director. And
said, then he followed up and says, who should we
look at? Well, I gave Earl Rudder a number of names,
several names, and I think every one of them they
brought in for interview. As far as you know, who
did the interviewing?
Was it Clyde Wells? No, he wasn't chairman of the
board at that point. I bet it was. It might have
been. At any rate, it was board members. Board
members. And Rudder? Rudder. And they, since that
time, at least two of them have become chancellors
or presidents of universities and things of that
sort. So they weren't idled. And the last one that
they interviewed simply told Rudder, said, hell,
you got Harry Kunkel here, why don't you pick him?
He's the most scholarly of them all. That was the
process. Again, I never interviewed anybody for
it. Earl Rudder just called me up one day and said,
I'd like to make you the dean. And I said, well, give
me a little time to think about it. So I went down,
and Beverly walked in about that point, and I told
her that. Describe, and so when you went over to
chat with him, can you... Went up. His office.
That's right. Can you describe the conversation
when you chatted with him seriously about the
task? No, he says, I want to make a dean as far as this
is concerned. Did he give you any directions,
guidance, advice? Yeah, I think so. He says,
you're a young man. You ought to do so-and-so. He'd
occasionally pop out. He says, you're a young man.
You ought to do so-and-so. He'd pop up with certain
directions, specifics of his advice. I don't
remember, but generally they were good. Did he
give you any don'ts? Don't do this, don't do that?
No. Well, he'd just do something good. Now, this is
1967. This is 1967. Well, by that time it was 1968.
68. And so March the 1st, 1968.
As far as you were aware at that point, was Mr.
Rutter in good health? I thought he was.
And who was the vice president for academic
affairs then? Because Hall had gone, hadn't he?
Who? Wayne Hall had gone to Washington, D.C. Bill
Graff? Bill Graff, yeah. Was Bill Graff ever vice
president? He was dean of... No, no, that's right.
He was, yeah. Who? Dean of faculty. The
geoscientists? that came from Chicago was he the
he was he was academic vice president and describe
the scope of your responsibilities as dean I mean
as director I was chief executive officer of the
college, or that was the college at that
particular point in time. I was chief executive
officer as acting
director, and I remained acting director for five
years. I was never officially appointed
director. I never asked for it. But you still had
the responsibility. I still had the
responsibility. For five years I was an acting
director. And so the experiment station
essentially was under eye. And Hutchison, who was
then, when I was named dean, was named associate
dean, and he essentially was told to rip a port to
me, which essentially worked out because he did.
And
did you inherit any particular problems that
needed quick solution? No. I created the problem
shortly thereafter. I asked Jarvis Miller to
become assistant director. And why did you select
Jarvis? Well, he was a freshman. He was a faculty
member and he didn't have anything else to do.
Okay. And so he was associate director reporting
to you. He was assistant director. Assistant
director. And then as he worked along, he seemed
to, he and I seemed to get along very well, so I
appointed him as associate.